---
layout: post
author: Nishant Kelkar
title: An introduction to run-length encoding
tags: computer-science algorithms
---

Run-length encoding is a popular technique for solving coding interview algorithms problems.
In this blog, we study what this technique is about, where it applies, how to think about it, and finally an example solved problem with a Java implementation.

Run-length encoding (RLE) is a popular string compression technique.
Suppose you are given the following string:

```java
String repeated = "ttthhhhisssssssss isss aaaaaan exxxxammplleeeeee";
```

Say we want to compress this string so that we don't have to store all the consecutive repeated characters as that is a waste of space.
What is a good way to perform this compression?
One idea is to do the following: replace each contiguous sequence of the same character with a tuple -- the character, and its count.

So for example, the first word in the string `repeated` above can be compressed to be:

```java
String repeatedFirstWord = "t3h4i1s9";
```

This basically says that we have 3 of `t`, 4 of `h`, 1 of `i`, and 9 of `s`.
In the same way, we can compress the remaining words of `repeated` to get an overall compressed version of the original string:

```java
String repeatedCompressed = "t3h4i1s9 i1s3 a6n1 e1x4a1m2p1l2e6";
```

Even with this naive form of compression, we can see that the compressed version is much smaller in size than the original version.

RLE is useful when you want to answer questions on contiguous runs of an input string.
Suppose we were solving the following problem:

<hr />
<div class="problem">GROUPS-K-APART</div>
<span class="problem-headers">Definition:</span> Given a boolean string $S$ and a parameter $K$<br/>
<span class="problem-headers">Question:</span> Are all contiguous groups of 1s in $S$ at least $K$ characters apart from each other?
<hr /><br/>
One way (not the _only way_...) to solve this problem is using a RLE approach.
The gap between any two contiguous groups of 1s is simply filled with a contiguous group of 0s (since the string $S$ is a binary string).
Let us take an example here.
Suppose we have `S = 00111000100111` and `K = 2`.
The RLE version of $S$ is going to be: `0{2}1{3}0{3}1{1}0{2}1{3}` where each number in the curly brackets is the count of the number of times the preceding binary digit occurs contiguously.
Once we have this RLE representation, we are guaranteed one thing: after every digit 0 (and its count), we are guaranteed to see a digit 1 (and _its_ count).
In such a form, we simply have to look at the counts of all 0s except for the 0s that occur at the beginning and at the end (since prefix/suffix 0s aren't really "in between" any groups of 1s), and make sure that these counts are $ \geq K$.

In the above example, we first have a leading `0{2}` which we can ignore, since it is a prefix to $S$.
There is no contiguous sequence of 0s that are a suffix to $S$, so that is good.
Barring these, we see the following counts of 0s within $S$: `[0{3}, 0{2}]`.
The algorithm simply traverses this list, and makes sure each count within it is $\geq K$.
If not, it returns a `false` to the question posed by the problem.
Otherwise, if each count in this list is greater than or equal to $K$, we return `true`.

Here is the code for this algorithm in Java:

```java
// Container for RLE information
public static class RLEInfo {
    public char c;
    public int cnt;

    RLEInfo (final char c, final int cnt) {
        this.c = c;
        this.cnt = cnt;
    }
}

public class Solution {
    public boolean onesAreKApart(String S, final int K) {
        // Check base cases first
        if (S.isEmpty()) return true;
        if (K < 0) return false;

        final int n = S.length();
        List<RLEInfo> rle = new ArrayList<>();

        char prev = S.charAt(0);
        int cnt = 1;

        // Step 1: extract the RLE
        for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
            final char curr = S.charAt(i);
            if (curr != prev) {
                // Start new RLE & reset
                rle.add(new RLEInfo(prev, cnt));
                prev = curr;
                cnt = 1;
            } else {
                cnt += 1;
            }
        }
        // Add the last one in!
        rle.add(new RLEInfo(prev, cnt));

        // Step 2: Use the RLE to solve problem
        // i = 1 because we don't care about first
        // chunk of 0s (or 1s)
        // i < rle.size() - 1 because we don't care
        // about last chunk of 0s (or 1s)
        for (int i = 1; i < rle.size() - 1; i++) {
            if (rle.get(i).c == '0' && rle.get(i).cnt < K) return false;
        }
        return true;
    }
}
```

And that's it!
You now have this handy trick of first compressing a string with lots of repeated contiguous characters that are the same, and then traversing this compressed representation to derive a certain property of your input string.
